# C 12 Complete CW

D: 04072017

**Define encapsulation and explain how it is implemented in C++.**

-   The wrapping up of data and functions (that operate on the data) into
    one single unit (called class) is called encapsulation.
-   It is implemented by using classes in C++.
-   A class is a way to bind the data describing the entity and its
    associated member functions together.
-   In C++, class makes a data type that is used to create objects
    of this type.
-   In a class:

    -   Data Members : Physical Characteristics
    -   Member Functions: Behaviour

-   ###### Example of a class:

    ```cpp
    class sample {
        int a, b;              // Data Members

        public:
        void read() {          // Member Function
            a = 1;
            b = 5;
        }
        void show() {          // Member Function
            cout << a + b;
        }
    };
    ```

---

**Define data abstraction and hiding.**

-   The act of representing only the essential features without
    including the background details is called data abstraction.
-   This concept is implemented using `public` access level specifier
    in a class.
-   The public members are directly accessible outside the class
    using an object of the class.
-   The private and the protected members of the class are not directly
    accessible from outside the class.
-   They are hidden from the outside world.
-   Hence, they implement the concept of data hiding.

-   ###### Example:

    ```cpp
    class Sample {
        int a, b;              // Data Members

        public:
        void read() {          // Member Function
            a = 1;
            b = 5;
        }
        void show() {          // Member Function
            cout << a + b;
        }
    };

    int main() {
        Sample S;
        S.a = 5;      // S1 - Invalid as a is a private member
        S.b = 10;     // S2 - Invalid as b is a private member
        S.read();     // S3 - valid
        S.show();     // S4 - valid
    }

    // Assuming S1 and S2 are edicated, output will be 6.
    ```

---

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <td><b>Member Functions</b></td>
            <td><b>User-Defined Functions</b></td>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Public member functions are invoked using an object with a 
                dot operator</td>
            <td>No such restrictions.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>The member functions can access private, protected and public
                members of the class.</td>
            <td>Can directly access only public members of the class.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Member functions are inline by default.</td>
            <td>Non inline by default.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

---

###### Note:

-   Member functions declared inside a class are inline by default.
-   Object -> structure variable / class variable.
-   When we define a class memory won't be allocated for data members.
-   Member functions statements will be stored in global memory.
-   Class / Structure variables are known as instances / objects.
-   The private and protected members of a global / local object are
    directly accessible inside the member function of the class.
-   Inside a class if we have a same class member and global variable,
    the member function can access only the class member.
-   The only difference between classes and structures w.r.t C++ is
    about the access level specifiers.
-   Structure will have only data members and class will have data
    members and member functions.
-   In structure, everything is public and accessible and vice-versa,
    in classes it is private by default.
-   Prototype of the memebr functions should be given in the class
    definition and the declaration

---

**Types of member functions**

-   (i) _Mutator member function_ : Function which accepts, displays or
    manipulates the data members.
-   (ii) _Accessor member function_ : can be used to access private and
    protected data members.
-   (iii) _Manager member functions_ : (Constructor & Destructor)
    It is a special member function which has the same name as that
    of the class.

---

**Constructors and Destructors**

If a user does not define a constructor, the compiler automatically allocates
memory for data members at a particular location by creating a member function.
This function is called constructor by default.

##### How to define a constructor

-   Constructor should have the same name as that of a class.
-   no return data type (including the `void` should not be used)

---

**Define a constructor. Explain the concept with a sample example.**

-   Constructor is a member function of a class that has the same name
    as that of a class without any return data type (not even void).
-   It is called automatically whenever an object is created.
-   The constructor allocates space for the data members for the newly
    created objects and initializes them with some legal value.
-   It has to be defined under public access level specifier only.

##### Example:

```cpp
class Sample {
    int a, b;

    public:
    Sample() {     // Default Constructor
        a = 1;
        b = 2;
    }

    void show() {
        cout << a << " " << b;
    }
};

int main() {
    Sample S;
    S.show();
    return 0;
    // Output :
    // 1 2
}
```

---

**Types of Constructors**

-   Default
-   Parameterised
-   Copy

---

**Default Constructor**

-   A member function which as the same as that of the class, which
    <u>does not accept any arguments </u> and which has no return data type
    (not even void) is called a default constructor.
-   It is invoked automatically whenever an object is created (or) declared
    without arguments.
-   It allocates space for all the data members of the newly created object
    and initialises them with some legal values.
-   It has to be defined under the public section only.

---

**Parameterized Constructor**

-   A member function that has the same name as that of the class, which
    <u>accepts parameters</u> and does not have any return data type
    (not even void) is called a parameterised constructor.
-   It is invoked automatically when the object is created with arguments.
-   It allocates space for all the data members of the newly created object
    and initialises them with the appropriate values accepted as argument.
-   It should be defined under public section only.

```cpp
class Sample {
    int a, b;

    public:
    Sample(int l, int m) {     // Parameterised Constructor
        a = l;
        b = m;
    }

    void show() {
        cout << a << " " << b;
    }
};

int main() {
    Sample S(1, 3);
    S.show();
    return 0;
    // Output :
    // 1 3
}
```

---

**Copy Constructor**

-   The member function of a class that has the same name as that of the
    class with no return data type and is of the form:
    `classname(classname&)` is called a copy constructor.
-   It is invoked automatically when an object is created and initialised
    to another object of the same class type, in the same statement.
-   It is used to initialize the data members of the newly created
    object with the corresponding data member of an already existing
    object.
-   It should be defined under public section only.

```cpp
class Sample {
    int a, b;

    public:
    Sample() {     // Default Constructor
        a = 1;
        b = 2;
    }

    Sample(Sample &R) {     // Copy Constructor
        a = R.a;
        b = R.b;
    }

    void show() {
        cout << a << " " << b;
    }
};

int main() {
    Sample S;
    Sample T(S);
    T.show();
    return 0;
    // Output :
    // 1 2
}
```

---

**Destructor**

-   The member function of a class that has the same name as that of the
    class preceeded by the `~` symbol, with no return data type (not even
    void) is called a destrcutor.
-   It is called automatically when an <u>object goes out of scope</u>.
-   It is used to deallocate space for the data members of an object
    that expires.
-   It has to be defined under public section only.
-   It does not accept any arguments.

```cpp
class Sample {
    int a, b;

    public:
    Sample() {     // Default Constructor
        a = 1;
        b = 2;
    }

    ~Sample() {     // Destructor
        cout << "Object Destroyed\n";
    }

    void show() {
        cout << a + b << endl;
    }
};

int main() {
    Sample X;
    if (1) {
        Sample Y;
        Y.show()
    } // Destructor called for deallocation of Y
    return 0;
} // Destructor called for deallocation of X

/* Output
3
Object Destroyed
Object Destroyed
*/
```

---

**Similarities between constructor and destructor**

-   Both are member functions defined under public section.
-   Should not return any return data type (not even void).
-   They come under the category of manager functions.

---

**Differences between constructor and destructor**

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <td><b>Constructor</b></td>
            <td><b>Destructor</b></td>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>It is used to allocate space for data members of an object.</td>
            <td>It is used to deallocate reserved space for the data
                members of an object.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Can be overloaded.</td>
            <td>Cannot be overloaded.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Invoked automatically when object is created.</td>
            <td>Called automatically when an object goes out of scope.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Can be invoked implicitly / explicitly.</td>
            <td>Will be called implicitly only.</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

---
